FedFusion: Manifold-Driven Federated Learning for Multi-Satellite and Multi-Modality Fusion
DaiXun Li, Weiying Xie, Senior Member, IEEE, Yunsong Li, Member, IEEE, and Leyuan Fang, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract
Multi-Satellite, multi-modality in-orbit fusion is a challenging task as it explores the fusion representation of complex high-dimensional data under limited computational resources. Deep neural networks can reveal the underlying distribution of multimodal remote sensing data, but the in-orbit fusion of multimodal data is more difficult because of the limitations of different sensor imaging characteristics, especially when the multimodal data follow nonindependent identically distribution (Non-IID) distributions. To address this problem while maintaining classification performance, this article proposes a manifold-driven multi-modality fusion framework, FedFusion, which randomly samples local data on each client to jointly estimate the prominent manifold structure of shallow features of each client and explicitly compresses the feature matrices into a low-rank subspace through cascading and additive approaches, which is used as the feature input of the subsequent classifier.
Considering the physical space limitations of the satellite constellation, we developed a multimodal federated learning (FL) module designed specifically for manifold data in a deep latent space. This module achieves iterative updating of the subnetwork parameters of each client through global weighted averaging, constructing a framework that can represent compact representations of each client.
The proposed framework surpasses existing methods in terms of performance on three multimodal datasets, achieving a classification average accuracy of 94.35% while compressing communication costs by a factor of 4. Furthermore, extensive numerical evaluations of real-world satellite images were conducted on the orbiting edge computing architecture based on Jetson TX2 industrial modules, which demonstrated that FedFusion significantly reduced training time by 48.4 min (15.18%) while optimizing accuracy. The codes will be available at: https://github.com/LDXDU/FedFusion.
Index Terms- Deep learning, feature fusion, federated learning (FL), multi-modality, remote sensing.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the continuous development of low-orbit satellites, more countries and organizations are adopting multisatellite constellations to tackle complex remote sensing tasks. These systems enable autonomous coordination of multiple remote sensing satellites, facilitating multi-modality feature classification among scientific payloads. In addition, fusion of spectral and spatial information extracted from each modal data effectively enhances the accuracy of distinguishing target classes.
However, some data types in multi-satellite distributed systems are sensitive in nature. For spaceborne data, only level-1 or higher products are provided for public access, and level-0 data are protected as privacy by relevant laws, and many jurisdictions have implemented data protection regulations that strictly limit the sharing of privacy-sensitive data among different clients and platforms. As a result, processing data closest to the source remains a challenge for remote sensing in-orbit fusion. In addition, doing so has significant advantages for deep learning scalability and can offer benefits such as enhanced privacy, reduced latency, greater reliability, and more efficient network bandwidth utilization.
There are some significant challenges that need to be addressed when implementing cooperative sensing of multimodal remote sensing constellations. First, the communication window period and long-distance transmission cause limited bandwidth and weak communication between platforms, which hinders the real-time fusion of multimodal constellations in orbit. Therefore, this leads to the current multimodal data fusion needs to be sent back to the ground for processing and even leads to complete interaction failure.
In recent years, distributed computing has had some viable applications for all-round and high-precision interaction of extensive multimodal remote sensing data. All the multi-modality fusion frameworks described above have focused on the problem of integrated data utilization. Although these distributed methods have alleviated the problem by reducing the amount of transmitted data through the use of processed features instead of raw data, the frequent transmission of data streams and the interaction patterns of high-dimensional manifold structures are still insufficient to meet the needs of multimodal fusion of remote sensing constellations in orbit. In addition, from the perspective of data privacy and communication burden, how to effectively fuse remote sensing image in-orbit has not been solved.
Satellites federated learning (FL) becomes a promising solution to address these challenges as an efficient multiclients’ communication scheme. Since Google introduced the concept of “federated learning” in 2016, FL has become a hot topic in many research areas, including finance and healthcare. FL attempts to use technical algorithms to encrypt the constructed models. The federated parties can train model parameters without providing their original data, which is expected to produce better results for the in-orbit processing of multi-satellite distributed systems.
However, a deep learning architecture for multi-satellite multisensor information interaction still needs to be improved for remote sensing in-orbit satellites. It focuses on two generic questions, “How to perform multi-modality fusion private” and “How to perform multi-modality fusion efficiently”. To this end, we systematically discuss various structures and propose network structures based on the following characteristics: 1) the transmission characteristics preserve a low-rank property lying in low-dimensional manifolds and 2) multimodality fusion serves in-orbit images’ classification and optimally updates gradient parameters.
We propose a manifold-driven multimodal fusion framework for multi-satellite and multi-modality fusion, FedFusion, and this method breaks the dilemma of space limitation of in-orbit multi-modality fusion. Notably, manifold-driven multimodal feature fusion and low-rank subspace learning are embedded into FedFusion to estimate complex multimodal feature representations. Extensive experiments on three multimodal data demonstrate that the framework exhibits a significant advantage for generalized multi-modality learning problems.
The contributions of this study can be summarized as follows:
We propose FedFusion, a novel manifold-driven multimodal fusion framework. It randomly samples local data and jointly estimates the salient manifold structure of each client’s shallow features. In addition, benefited from the singular value decomposition (SVD), it compresses the low-dimensional representation of each modal data feature matrix into a low-rank subspace through concatenative and additive methods. This design for manifold dimensionality reduction in multimodal in-orbit fusion mitigates the disaster of dimensionality caused by the redundancy of multimodal data.
A multimodal FL module has been developed specifically for deep latent space manifold data. In this module, each client executes local computations based on the weighted average of global gradients and its local modality. The updated parameters are then sent to the server for further iteration, resulting in the creation of a framework that can represent each client’s compact representation. This general module can be integrated into any other multimodal fusion framework.
We conducted extensive experiments on real-world multimodal satellite images using a nonindependent identically distribution (Non-IID) approach on both high-performance computing platforms and orbit edge computing architectures. Our approach achieved remarkable accuracy surpassing current multimodal classification methods with minimal communication costs. Furthermore, to validate the efficiency of the federated model, we compared its training time with mainstream algorithms, resulting in optimal performance.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Multimodal Classification
In the face of increasingly sophisticated and diverse application demands for remote sensing scene characterization, deep learning has made remarkable progress in addressing the technical bottlenecks that arise from the fusion processing of multimodality. In recent years, researchers have been exploring the utilization of the multimodal deep learning models to advance the classification of multimodal remote sensing images. This progress can be categorized into two primary groups: feature fusion methods and RS classification learning framework.
First, regarding feature fusion methods, the traditional multi-modality classification tasks are divided into three main categories with different stages of feature fusion: 1) early fusion; 2) network layer fusion; and 3) late fusion. The traditional early fusion, which integrates two modal data into a deep learning model by a direct stacking method, could have performed better in practice. Several data fusion approaches have been proposed to address this obstacle. In addition, some methods based on multi-modality fusion between network layers have been proposed. Late-fusion architectures are interpreted as a combination of hybrid expert and stacked generalization methods. In multimodal remote sensing data fusion, network layer fusion shows better competitiveness.
Second, from the perspective of image classification learning framework, the RS multimodal classification framework is mainly divided into traditional classifiers, classical convolutional networks, and transformer networks. In terms of conventional classifiers, researchers proposed the potential of using support vector machine (SVM) and random forest to estimate forest above-ground biomass through multisource remote sensing data. In terms of classical convolutional networks, various methods have been proposed to fully mine and combine the complementary information of multimodal data and local/global spectral spatial information. In terms of transformer architecture, a new multimodal fusion transformer network was proposed that uses other multimodal data as external classification markers in transformer encoders, which achieves better generalization.
In the field of RS multimodal fusion, various fusion methods can be used including early fusion, late fusion, and network layer fusion. However, early fusion techniques combine different modalities into a multichannel image before network input, which can lead to issues such as the curse of dimensionality, information redundancy, and overfitting. Specifically, the high-dimensional input features make the model hard to train, increase computational complexity, and result in blurred object boundaries. Late-fusion techniques may result in information loss, especially lower level information. The network layer fusion used in FedFusion can fully leverage the diversity and complementarity of different modalities to alleviate information redundancy and overfitting issues. In addition, in handling nonlinear problems and learning deeper and more complex features, using 2D-CNN network architecture proves to be more effective than using traditional models such as SVM. Compared with the transformer network architecture, a significant reduction in model parameters can be achieved while maintaining comparable accuracy. This kind of parameter reduction improves hardware adaptability and is suitable for RS FL applications.
B. Federated Learning
With the growth of big data, data owners are no longer only concerned about the volume of data but are becoming more concerned about privacy and security. Researchers have recently explored the possibility of using FL and developing variants to process heterogeneous data from edge devices efficiently. In the application scenario of federation learning, the differences between edge devices and collected data can make the whole training process inefficient. There are four approaches to solving the heterogeneity problem of the system: asynchronous communication, device sampling, fault tolerance mechanisms, and model heterogeneity.
In a multiedge device environment, asynchronous communication solutions can better address the system’s heterogeneity according to the asynchronous communication scheme. In addition, not every device needs to be involved in every iteration of the training process. Similarly, we need to consider the acceptability of devices in an FL environment. An FL algorithm was proposed that determines the optimal tradeoff between local updates and global parameter aggregation to accommodate the arithmetic limitations of edge devices. Finally, analytical data handling from different edge devices is the key to federation learning. A local–global federation averaging algorithm was proposed that combines local representation learning and global model federation training to improve the model’s flexibility in handling heterogeneous data. However, these methods spend much effort extracting heterogeneous data features, and most of their architectures are based on edge-side devices. Therefore, it is significant to mine the heterogeneous feature information of remote sensing images to improve classification accuracy.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Problem Definition
In this article, we focus on how to train global models with different modalities of data stored on heterogeneous devices to achieve classification tasks. The height, width, and the number of image channels are denoted as relevant parameters, and the pixel pair of the first modality is represented as a specific parameter. The two modalities capture the same scene with the same label information with a certain number of classification categories.
The goal of image classification is to learn a model and map the input images of different modalities into a new mapping to represent the probability of each pixel corresponding to different categories, and set the maximum probability of different categories as the threshold to get a binary prediction graph of hard classification, where values 1 and 0, respectively, represent the category and other categories.
Based on this basic model, we propose the FedFusion network architecture. The designed feature fusion framework allows data fusion of multiple parties to train deep learning models without any participant revealing their raw data to the server. The dynamic feature approximation approach compresses local features so that each client’s communication reduces by up to about 4.00× per round.
At the same time, an optimized reconstruction error loss function is proposed to optimize the proposed network.
B. Manifold-Driven Multi-Modality Fusion Framework
Our FedFusion framework is inspired by multi-modality cross fusion. The two branches improve model performance by sharing the output of the features from the convolutional layers, which fits right in with the privacy protection of federal learning, especially for better information fusion of heterogeneous data from different sensors.
First, two sets of heterogeneous data are put into two branches of the convolution operation to obtain the to-be-learned weights and biases. The output feature map of the convolutional layer is defined with a specific formula. To accelerate the convergence of the network layer and control the gradient explosion to prevent gradient disappearance, the output results are batch normalized with a corresponding formula. Before importing the batch-normalized result into the next block, the nonlinear activation function (ReLU) is applied to get the final output of the convolutional layer.
At each client, the output is obtained through the convolution layer. In this work, we use upsampling to enhance the spatial dimension of single-modal data. Specifically, the output of the convolution layer is fed as input into two identical upsampled module to get two results, and then the two outputs are merged in spatial dimensions to be consistent with the dimensions of subsequent multimodal data merges. Channel upsampling can be represented with a specific formula, where the upsampling module is made up of two sets of Conv 1×1, BN, Relu, and the maximum pooled layer.
The fusion layer learns the characteristics of different modality by interactively updating the parameters of other subnetworks, and the fusion output is obtained with specific formulas. As the multi-modality sample input from the next layer, the components of the fusion output share the same training weight, and the obtained cross weight has a higher information density than the original weight.
C. Multimodal FL Module
In this section, we discuss how to share heterogeneous feature of different clients in a private way to update the model of each client. According to the characteristics of multimodal network layer feature transmission of remote sensing samples, we propose a manifold-driven FL framework. The program consists of two main components: 1) local fusion update of data and 2) update of the global model in each client.
In each round, the server first selects a subset through uniform sampling, and then sends a copy of the current server model to each of these selected clients with a specific update formula.
In this study, we consider a multiround FL scenario, where each client uses a fixed learning rate to compute the average gradient on its local data at the current round. As a typical example of vertical FL, remote sensing multimodality FL allows servers from each client in the same scene aggregate heterogeneous data to achieve gradient and model updating. Vertical FL is categorized based on the characteristic dimension of the data, and relevant parts of data with identical scene but different characteristics are extracted for training. Therefore, vertical FL can improve the feature dimension of the original client data.
In FedFusion, modal aggregation is used to realize the privacy mechanism of each client and train the global model by summarizing the feature information of each model. Specifically, the local server data are iterated and updated locally several times to obtain the output model, which increases the amount of local computation. Subsequently, the local iteration of other servers is aggregated and averaged with the local gradient to update the model, thereby avoiding the transmission of original data during the training process.
D. SVD via FedFusion
In our FedFusion framework, although the volume of data features in a single mode may not be large, it incurs relatively high costs as the communication cycle increases. As a result, we aim to explore federated optimization algorithms that compress the exchanged feature map between clients to reduce computational expenses. This method gives special attention to the sparse attributes of remote sensing data, where the model parameters generated based on sparse representation exhibit low-rank properties.
It identifies a subspace that captures the important structures of the feature map through random sampling at each client. The input matrix is then explicitly compressed to this low-rank subspace. Specifically, the local feature of a single client can be divided into three smaller vectors by SVD. These vectors are then sequentially distributed to each client for reconstruction. Notably, we approximate the feature by decomposing it into the product of three matrices with specific dimensional parameters, and K is the number of retained singular values.
In the remote sensing scenario application, the local feature of the server is decomposed in the same way and the diagonal matrix is split through the dynamic approximation method. Meanwhile, the local features are reduced by the diagonal matrix and sent to each client for recombination to realize lossless compression. The premise is that we are aware of the distribution structure of the sparse mode of remote sensing data during the design.
E. Loss Function
The output of the fusion components passing through the global data spreading module is defined as specific parameters. The overall network is trained by the cross entropy loss, mean squared error (MSE) loss, and L2 norm regularization. Here, the actual value of the sample is referred to with a parameter, n represents the number of observed values in the dataset, and the L2 norm denotes the sum of the weights of all the network layers. This approach is used to mitigate the issue of overfitting caused by an excessive number of model parameters.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Data Description
We are aware that modern Constellation systems and integrated unmanned aerial systems can incorporate a diverse range of HSI and LiDAR sensors, such as the Optech Titan MW equipped with an integrated camera and the CASI-1500 hyperspectral imager. Therefore, a detailed digital elevation model (DEM) of the surveyed region can be generated. Furthermore, small unmanned aerial systems or satellite clusters can accommodate HSI and LiDAR sensors, which facilitate the acquisition of two types of datasets for evaluating the fusion accuracy and joint communication performance in this study. The following is a brief description of the dataset used:
HSI-LiDAR Houston2013 Dataset: The ITRES CASI-1500 imaging sensor was used to acquire the HSI product over the University of Houston campus and its surrounding rural areas in Texas, USA. The dataset comprises two data sources: a hyperspectral image with 144 bands covering a wavelength range of 364–1046 nm at a 10-nm spectral interval and LiDAR data with a single band. The image is sized at 349 × 1905 pixels. In addition, the dataset investigates 15 land-use land-cover data (LULC) related categories in the scene.
Trento Multimodal Dataset: The Trento multimodal dataset includes hyperspectral and LiDAR data collected from Trento AISA Eagle sensors and Optech ALTM 3100EA sensors, respectively. The HSI data contain 63 bands with wavelengths ranging from 0.42 to 0.99 m, while the LiDAR data provide elevation information in a single band. The spatial resolution is 1 m per pixel. The scene includes six vegetation land-cover classes that are mutually exclusive, and the pixel count is 600 × 166 pixels.
MUUFL Gulfport Scene Dataset: MUUFL Gulfport scene was captured over the University of Southern Mississippi campus in November 2010 using the reflective optics system imaging spectrometer (ROSIS) sensor. The HSI of this dataset contains 325 × 220 pixels with 72 spectral bands. But the initial and final eight bands are removed due to noise, resulting in a total of 64 bands, and the LiDAR image contains elevation data of two bands. The dataset includes 11 urban land-cover classes with a certain number of ground-truth pixels.
Augsburg On-Site Multimodal Satellite Dataset: To simulate real in-orbit federated application scenarios similar to FedFusion, we used an on-site multimodal satellite dataset to validate the framework’s effectiveness. This dataset comprises synthetic aperture radar (SAR) data and HSI data captured over the Augsburg city in Germany. For the SAR data, we obtained the ground range detected (GRD) product in interferometric wide (IW) swath mode using the Sentinel1 satellite platform. This product includes dual-polarization SAR data with VV and VH channels. It is important to note that no preprocessing operations were performed on the data that would affect the nature of the on-site data, except for precise orbit profiling, radiometric calibration, and terrain correction. In addition, we collected the HSI images dataset using the Sentinel-2 satellite platform in near real-time. The images represent bottom-of-atmosphere (BOA) reflectance with 12 spectral bands ranging from 440 to 2200 nm.
B. Evaluation Metrics and Parameter Setting
Evaluation Metrics: In terms of testing image classification performance, three commonly used indexes: overall accuracy (OA), average accuracy (AA), kappa (κ), and class accuracy (CA) are calculated to quantify classification performance. CA represents the model’s ability to classify and recognize each category in the dataset. At the same time, by calculating the traffic transmitted in the training stage, namely, the modal characteristic parameter values of other clients, the communication ratio between each client and the original model is obtained to verify the effectiveness of the communication lightweight module.
Parameter Setting: Our framework FedFusion is tested in two scenarios. In the toy experiments, we select 16 clients, each of which is equipped with NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU and uses PyTorch platform, using NCCL as communication backend. These clients simulated eight hyperspectral imaging satellites and eight LiDAR imaging satellites and were randomly divided into a training set containing 95% data and a validation set containing 5% data.
In the simulated on-orbit experiment, we build a federated satellite constellation system that is close to the resources of satellites in orbit. In the construction of computer hardware, we are consistent with the existing satellite on-board computing resources, characterizing on-board computing with a Jetson TX2 industrial module. Jetson TX2 is a mobile GPU containing high performance, low power, and efficiency, and its industrial variant is designed for extreme temperature environments. Its small size allows the integration of all other necessary components within a 1U volume, and the 3U cube contains a 2U camera system. The 7.5-W power pattern closely matches the 7.1-W input power provided by the surface-mounted solar panels. The OEC computing model supports computing systems other than Jetson by varying the input performance and energy parameters.
On satellite data acquisition, we use the Sentinel-1 and -2 satellite real-time platform to evaluate the federated space. Specifically, we consider a constellation of eight satellites, and each satellite collects and stores its proprietary remote sensing data. These satellites acquired SAR images and HSI for the city of Augsburg via Sentinel-1 and -2 satellite real-time platforms, respectively, and distributed them to four analog satellite industrial modules. We will use this to simulate four HSI satellites and four LiDAR satellites and run our experiments with Non-IID data distributions.
Nevertheless, transmitting all the satellite data to ground stations is often deemed impractical or unfeasible. To address this challenge, we leverage FL, where a server coordinates the training process with a set of clients without sharing the clients’ training data. We let all the simulated satellites act as a single FL client, and each server achieves a fused direct connection, because it is much faster than the satellite back to the ground and back to the satellite. Each FL client manages the learning process and maintains the current version of the global model and sends it to the other satellites, and it also receives model updates and aggregates the updates into the global model.
At the same time, we take into account the heterogeneous connections between satellites. According to the satellite connection histogram of FedSpace, the number of connections of each satellite may be quite different due to the trajectory window period. Therefore, in each round of communication fusion, the server first selects a set of working satellite clients by uniform sampling. A copy of the current server model is then sent to each of these selected clients for fusion. This heterogeneous connectivity allows updating the global model without waiting for other satellites to introduce serious obsolescence.
In the training phase, the learning strategy of Adam optimizer with second-order momentum was used, and the learning rate is updated by the StepLR strategy. That means the learning rate is adjusted by a fixed interval, with an interval of 60 epochs in 300 epochs totally. The initial learning rate and gamma are set to 0.001 and 0.5, respectively. The training batch of the dataset is set to 64, and the momentum parameter was set to 0.9. Meanwhile, L2 norm regularization is used to prevent model overfitting. It is worth noting that due to the larger size and increased number of categories in the MUUFL dataset compared with others, it has fewer labels available. Therefore, we adjusted the batch size to 128 and optimized the ReduceLROnPlateau learning rate adjustment strategy.
C. Ablation Study
First, the effectiveness of the proposed method is verified by designing a series of ablation experiments on three datasets.
Validation of the Baseline Framework: We evaluate the reasoning ability of different basic frameworks, namely, local feature fusion framework (local-fusion), federated feature fusion framework (Non-SVD), and our FedFusion feature fusion framework, from three indicators: OA, AA, and κ. Local-fusion is a feature-level fusion model that operates between layers within a single client, using a 2D-CNN architecture. In contrast, Non-SVD is a nonlightweight federated feature fusion model.
In the three datasets, while the feature transmission fusion network showed significant improvement compared with the traditional local feature fusion network, the FedFusion network further increased the accuracy compared with the federal framework. These outcomes validate the use of FedFusion as a fundamental framework for FL. In addition, the classification performance by FL is generally better than that based on single client communication, and our method brings incremental results to OA, AA, and κ.
2) Impact of Removing Single Modality: We illustrate the impact of removing single modality, highlighting the effectiveness of multimodal feature-level fusion across all three datasets. The results suggest that multimodal feature fusion significantly improves accuracy and supports its importance in remote sensing tasks.
3) Impact of K on Dynamic Feature Approximation: We illustrate the impact of manifold-driven dynamic feature approximation on the accuracy of scene classification in three datasets, including nonuse of the method. In our approach, given an input patch size of 7 × 7, SVD’s K values range from 1 to 4 based on two 2 × 2 subsampling and maximum pooling. The line graph demonstrates that the removal of redundant feature map information via SVD significantly enhances classification accuracy while minimizing client communication.
The experimental results show that before using SVD, the communication cost on the three datasets was at a certain level. When K=1,2,3,4, the average communication compression ratios for the three datasets have specific values. Combining the results, it is evident that a K value of 2 reaches the optimal balance between client communication transmission volume and classification accuracy for all the three datasets. While maintaining the best accuracy, the communication cost is reduced by more than three times, greatly improving FedFusion’s processing efficiency.
D. Comparisons With Previous Methods
The accuracy performance of the proposed model and other models on the three datasets is presented, with the best results denoted in bold. In selecting comparison methods, we consider classic deep learning techniques such as SVM, CNN2D, and RNN, as well as mainstream remote sensing multimodal methods including cross, CALC, and transformer methods such as ViT and MFT. Our evaluation demonstrates that the proposed method not only achieves 16 clients’ federated lightweight communication but also outperforms other methods by achieving the highest OA, AA, and k scores across most classification tasks.
Overall, FedFusion achieves a well-balanced tradeoff between communication efficiency and classification accuracy, outperforming other existing networks. The proposed model demonstrated dominant performance in all-classes accuracy on the Houston2013 dataset, surpassing mainstream methods in terms of OA, AA, and κ coefficient. Although traditional methods exhibit higher accuracy when incorporating HSI and LiDAR data, FedFusion still shows significant improvement compared with other models.
FedFusion exhibits higher OA and AA than other classifiers on the Trento dataset, with marginally lower AA in some aspects. On the MUFFL dataset, the OA, AA, and κ of FedFusion reach specific high values, which is better than the best MFT method at present. However, the transformer network (MFT) outperforms FedFusion in some aspects of performance, which might be due to its larger model structure by approximately ten times the parameter size of the FedFusion model. However, this contradicts the intended use case for FL, which is suitable for in-orbit learning and processing of satellite clusters in remote sensing applications. Therefore, our FedFusion model is more suitable for practical remote sensing scenarios than other models.
Meanwhile, the proposed FedFusion framework is designed for the fusion of inertial multimodal on-site data. To verify the effectiveness of the framework on in-orbit data in the field, we conducted validation experiments on the on-site multimodal satellite dataset in Augsburg and compared it with other existing multimodal fusion methods. The performance accuracy of FedFusion on the in-orbit satellite dataset is superior to other fusion methods, with an OA of 92.46%, which outperforms other methods by specific margins. Moreover, FedFusion achieves comprehensive performance improvement in terms of AA, surpassing the best-performing methods by a certain percentage.
E. Efficiency Analysis
To comprehensively compare the efficiency of FedFusion and other comparison methods, we conducted two aspects of validation. First, for the toy experiment, we measured the necessity of SVD module in three off-site HSI/LiDAR datasets. The experimental results show that before using SVD, the communication cost on the three datasets was at specific levels, and after using SVD, the communication cost is reduced significantly, by more than three times, greatly improving FedFusion’s processing efficiency.
Second, to verify the efficiency of FedFusion on the simulated satellite system, we first set up a federated satellite platform with the same hardware setup as the real satellite system and the live satellite data. We then compare the training and inference methods under the same computational resources and verify the efficiency superiority of FedFusion by comparing the time of the different methods.
Compared with the local single-client running, FedFusion takes full advantage of multiclient FL, reducing the training time significantly, achieving a 6.59× acceleration. Compared with other deep learning methods, FedFusion has a lower running time than classical networks such as CNN-2D, RNN, and Cross. However, transformer models (e.g., ViT, MFT) are difficult to deploy in satellite onboard resources due to their huge computational complexity, which takes more than 3000 s. The above experiments all verify the high efficiency of FedFusion compared with other methods.
F. Visual Comparison
The results demonstrate our macroscopic performance evaluation on the classification maps generated by various models. To achieve this, we used a visualization method that assigned a unique color to each class. Traditional classifiers produce distinct classification results. However, their multimodal fusion methods only rely on the spectral representation of HSI data, which lack spatial information and result in prominent salt-and-pepper noise in the classification maps.
In comparison, the transformer method produces visually superior results in the classification maps when compared with classic networks. The transformer’s network architecture prioritizes the correlation between adjacent spectra and channels, and it can transmit location information across layers, contributing to its enhanced performance. On the other hand, FedFusion approaches the problem by considering the complementary information from different modal sources through its feature-level fusion characteristic. This approach reduces the granularity of texture in the classification maps, resulting in a more diversified and refined set of details.
Overall, FedFusion is suitable for generating classification maps with improved performance and nuanced details. Its asynchronous federated optimization algorithm and feature-level fusion approach make it the ideal choice for land use and scene classification applications.
V. CONCLUSION
A key issue in the federated feature fusion problem is how to develop a unified model for feature fusion and global update without losing low-rank features of high-dimensional data, which has not been adequately solved under the previous framework. This article presents the FedFusion framework, which effectively addresses the challenges of multi-modality fusion in multi-satellite and multi-satellite constellations for remote sensing telemetry tasks. FedFusion uses manifold learning and FL techniques, combined with a dynamic feature approximation method by SVD, to enable in-orbit fusion of multi-satellite and multi-modality without the need to transmit back to the ground. The proposed method achieves excellent performance on multimodal data and exhibits significant advantages for generalized multi-modality learning problems.
Moreover, accomplishing multimodal data in-orbit fusion is a pivotal task in remote sensing intelligent interpretation. The proposed FedFusion method successfully performs manifold-driven feature-level fusion on multimodal data. It can also optimize communication and achieve optimal performance across the datasets considered. Hence, it is agreed that FedFusion demonstrates exceptional fusion ability and communication performance, showing its potential for executing federated interpretation tasks in remote sensing and Earth observation.
It is worth noting that our unit is about to launch a number of hyperspectral and LiDAR satellites, which are equipped with FT-D2000 processors. FedFusion has completed in-orbit preverification on 8 FT-D2000 industrial module, and the algorithm is about to be mounted on satellites for real in-orbit communication and processing. We will also continue to update the progress of our on-orbit federal work.